Address validation take 2 (#70)
tlswg/dtls-conn-id: draft-ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id.md

- The received datagram has been cryptographically verified using the DTLS record layer processing procedures.

- The received datagram is "newer" (in terms of their epoch and sequence
number) than the last datagram that successfully updated the source address.
This condition ensures that replayed datagrams cannot be used to perform address 
updates. Note that this condition does not help when the attacker is able to 
replay datagrams that arrive earlier at the DTLS peer than the original datagram.

- There is a strategy for performing a perform some reachability test. 
No such test is defined in this	specification; {{!I-D.tschofenig-tls-dtls-rrc}} 
defines an extension for such a DTLS protocol extension.

The above ensures correctness of the protocol in presence of packet
reordering at the network layer, while also thwarting a man-on-the-side
attacker attempting to use spoofed or replayed records to reroute return
traffic.

> Implementations that offer an application layer return routability check 

Author: turned this way sounds a bit funny.  I'd rather say that "[...] if the implementation offers *peer address update detection*, it MUST report any peer address update on CID-enabled sessions to applications"

Reviewer: I merged your text with the text from Martin and replaced the current paragraph

                      length_of_DTLSInnerPlaintext;
~~~

# Peer Address Update {#peer-address-update}

> When a datagram with a CID is received that has a source address different than the one currently associated with the DTLS connection, the receiver MUST NOT replace the source address currently stored in the association with the source address specified in the received datagram unless the following conditions are met:

Reviewer 2: Rewrapping this only.
```suggestion
When a datagram with a CID is received that has a source address different than
the one currently associated with the DTLS connection, the receiver MUST NOT
replace the source address currently stored in the association with the source
address specified in the received datagram unless the following conditions are
met:
```

However, I would also suggest that when you talk about "source address" (other than the first instance), you instead use "peer address", perhaps as follows:

```suggestion
When a datagram with a CID is received that has a source address different than
the one currently associated with the DTLS connection, the receiver MUST NOT
replace the address it uses for sending datagrams to its peer with the source
address specified in the received datagram unless the following conditions are
met:
```

Reviewer: I am failing to see the changes in the proposed text. I understand why you want to use the term 'peer address' in context and I proposed some text

> - The received datagram has been cryptographically verified using the DTLS record layer processing procedures.

Reviewer 2: ...and any duplicate detection (?)

Reviewer: We list the different requirements separately.

> - The received datagram is "newer" (in terms of their epoch and sequence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The received datagram is "newer" (in terms of both epoch and sequence
```

Reviewer: Sounds good to me!

> number) than the last datagram that successfully updated the source address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
number) than the newest datagram received.
```

for the parenthetical, I would instead use "The received datagram is "newer" than the any other datagram that has been received (meaning that the newer datagram has a higher epoch or a matching epoch and a higher sequence number)"

Reviewer: Fine for me. I think both text segments are pretty clear about their meaning but I am happy to take this text proposal on board.

This condition ensures that replayed datagrams cannot be used to perform address 

> updates. Note that this condition does not help when the attacker is able to 

Reviewer 2: I think that the main thing here is to observe that reordered datagrams don't cause excessive thrashing if datagrams are reordered by the network.  That makes this less than a firm requirement and maybe not something that you want to include in the list, but more as supplementary information.

Reviewer: I am not sure what text changes would be useful here because I don't understand the "thrashing aspect" you talk about here.

Reviewer 2: "Reordered datagrams that are sent prior to a change in a peer address might otherwise cause a valid address change to be reverted. This also limits the ability of an attacker to use replayed datagrams to force a spurious address change, which could result in denial of service, however an attacker might be able to force an address change if they are able to rewrite source addresses or if replayed packets are able to arrive before any original."

?

Reviewer 3: The main trigger for my comment in issue #69 was the previous definition based on "record sequence number window", which then would turn into "MUST use such a window" in order to prevent such simple kind of attacks.

I therefore wrote that comment, to show, that both solutions may have their justification. 

Though you never know, if your under "fire" or if it*s a delay before or after a NAT. Therfore you will never know, what will be the perfect action, to update or not update the address. Neither with the window nor with the newer definition.
My personal preference is therefore the simpler implementation.
An my intention of issue #69 is to prevent this extension from adding a "MUST" to the window approach.

Reviewer 3: > This also limits the ability of an attacker to use replayed datagrams

FMPOV, both solutions, the "window" or "newer" will prevent address updates from replay attacks. In difference to a replay attack, where the record sequence number is used twice (and assume, that the modified datagram is received later), such attack are mitigated by both approaches.

Reviewer 3: > however an attacker might be able to force an address change if they are able to rewrite source addresses

FMPOV, that's mainly the "on-path-adversary", which requires other means, which are out of the scope of this document.

> or if replayed packets are able to arrive before any original. 

FMPOV, the means against such "lucky attackers" are the same as for the "on-path-adversary".

In my comment in the tls-mailing list 

https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/tls/8EAYDGU5RqVcH6POHFZg30wcUYE
  
I expressed, 

> I would prefer to have the basic advice, to apply some kind of filter against modified replay attacks (either the 
> DTLS 1.2 Anti-Replay protection, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6347#section-4.1.2.6, or other means, see
> proposal https://github.com/tlswg/dtls-conn-id/issues/69 ) in the "draft-ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id", 
> instead of including that to an additional RFC together with the more complex "on-path adversary" scenario.

So again, my preference is to have the simple "filter" definitions "window or newer" both mentioned in this document. Also the comment, that "on-path-adversary" will able to bypass that protection (as "lucky" attacker will also do). 
And the discussion and solution for the "advanced on-path-adversary" in a separate document.

Reviewer: I completely agree with you. We don't want to make this artificially complicated.

replay datagrams that arrive earlier at the DTLS peer than the original datagram.

> - There is a strategy for performing a perform some reachability test. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There is a strategy for ensuring that the new peer address is able to receive and process
DTLS datagrams for the connection.
```

Reviewer: Ok for me.

No such test is defined in this	specification; {{!I-D.tschofenig-tls-dtls-rrc}} 
defines an extension for such a DTLS protocol extension.

> The above ensures correctness of the protocol in presence of packet

Reviewer 2: There is no "ensures" here.  And, as mentioned, I think that the reordering thing is an optimization only, the reordering point can be separated.

"The above is necessary to protect against attacks that use datagrams with spoofed addresses or replayed datagrams to trigger attacks."

Reviewer: Good text for me. I included it.

reordering at the network layer, while also thwarting a man-on-the-side
attacker attempting to use spoofed or replayed records to reroute return
traffic.

> Implementations that offer an application layer return routability check 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Application protocols that implement protection against these attacks depend on
being aware of changes in peer addresses so that they can engage the necessary
mechanisms.
```

Then remove the remaining lines of the paragraph.

Reviewer: The proposed changes are good for me

                      length_of_DTLSInnerPlaintext;
~~~

# Peer Address Update

> When a CID record is received with a different source address than the

Reviewer: How about 

"When a datagram with a CID is received that has a source address different than the one currently associated with the DTLS connection, the receiver MUST NOT replace the source address currently stored in the association with the source address specified in the received datagram unless the following conditions are met:
 * The received datagram has been cryptographically verified using the DTLS record layer processing procedures. 
- The received datagram are "newer" (in terms of their epoch and sequence
  number) than the last datagram that successfully updated the source address.

Author: I like it, but I think using the term datagram instead of record when talking about crypto operations mixes layers.

In addition, endpoints can use the CID to attach arbitrary metadata
to each record they receive. This may be used as a mechanism to communicate
per-connection information to on-path observers. There is no straightforward way to
address this concern with CIDs that contain arbitrary values. Implementations
concerned about this aspects SHOULD refuse to use CIDs.

An on-path adversary, who is able to observe the DTLS protocol exchanges between the
DTLS client and the DTLS server, is able to link the observed payloads to all
subsequent payloads carrying the same ID pair (for bi-directional
communication).  Without multi-homing or mobility, the use of the CID
exposes the same information as the 5-tuple.

> An on-path adversary can also black-hole traffic or create a reflection attack

Reviewer 3: At the risk of repeating it too often:

I would prefer, not to relate the "black-hole" attack of an "on-path-adversary" with the CID!
Until now, nobody presented any reason, why such a general "black-hole" is related to this CID.

So:
- either generalize the threat

"An on-path adversary can not only black-hole traffic, which is generally also possible without the CID, additionally a reflection attack could be created ..."
 
- or remove the "black-hole".

In my experience, such threats, which are for experts obviously not related to a specific technique, will be cited by others, and then it will turn into time consuming discussion instead of spending the time in protection against real threats.

THEREFORE:
Please, don't overstate the threat! The left real threat one is hard enough.

Reviewer: Fair enough. That threat is not new to this document and hasn't been a concern to anyone as far as I know. I will remove it.

Reviewer: Changed the text and removed the term black-hole.

a CID in this example as well. 

#  Privacy Considerations {#priv-cons}

The CID replaces the previously used 5-tuple and, as such, introduces
an identifier that remains persistent during the lifetime of a DTLS connection.
Every identifier introduces the risk of linkability, as explained in {{RFC6973}}.

An on-path adversary observing the DTLS protocol exchanges between the
DTLS client and the DTLS server is able to link the observed payloads to all
subsequent payloads carrying the same ID pair (for bi-directional
communication).  Without multi-homing or mobility, the use of the CID
exposes the same information as the 5-tuple.

With multi-homing, a passive attacker is able to correlate the communication
interaction over the two paths and the sequence number makes it possible 
to correlate packets across CID changes. The lack of a CID update mechanism 
in DTLS 1.2 makes this extension unsuitable for mobility scenarios where 
correlation must be considered. Deployments that use DTLS in multi-homing
environments and are concerned about this aspects SHOULD refuse to use CIDs in 
DTLS 1.2 and switch to DTLS 1.3 where a CID update mechanism is provided and 

> sequence number encryption is offered. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
sequence number encryption is available. 
```

DTLS client and the DTLS server, is able to link the observed payloads to all

> subsequent payloads carrying the same connection id pair (for bi-directional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subsequent payloads carrying the same CID pair (for bi-directional
```

Reviewer: Good catch on the CID/connection id terminology

communication).  Without multi-homing or mobility, the use of the CID

> has the same privacy properties of the 5-tuple.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exposes the same information as the 5-tuple.
```

Reviewer: The proposed change looks good to me

RFC EDITOR: PLEASE REMOVE THE THIS SECTION

> draft-ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id-06

Reviewer 3: My feeling is, that should be draft-ietf-tls-dtls-connection-id-**07**, or?
